Added SORA v3 (#334)
sora-xor/sora-docs: src/sora-v3.md

## The SORA V3 Hubchain

At the core of this network upgrade lies the SORA v3 Hub Chain, an infrastructure that:

- **Enables seamless collaboration**: Bridging permissioned and decentralized systems for cost reduction and mutual benefit.
- **Enhances resilience**: De-correlates CBDCs and other Government-issued digital assets from political and economic instability, providing a stable, supranational platform for global transactions.
- **Supports economic sovereignty**: Balances the role of nation states in managing their domains with the freedom of borderless financial activities.

The SORA v3 Hub Chain will enable anyone, including central banks, to be able to create their own assets on the global SORA v3 platform. For those wanting greater privacy, they can process transactions in a private subnet they control, without sacrificing the security or interoperability of a supranational, decentralized blockchain.

> ![](/.gitbook/assets/sora-v3-hub-chain-cbdc.png)

Reviewer: This image looks terrible in dark theme
![Screenshot from 2025-04-09 22-00-08](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/f6daf499-bac2-48cb-aff8-4d715c0eebd6)

Author: Addressed.

Author: Edited

Built on [Hyperledger Iroha 2](https://www.lfdecentralizedtrust.org/blog/announcing-hyperledger-iroha-2), the SORA v3 Hub Chain empowers nations, institutions, and individuals by providing a solid infrastructure base to create a robust and inclusive financial system, bringing the best of blockchain technology under one network.

## SORA V3 Tokenomics

> The SORA V3 tokenomics were defined over two iterations, the first, called for a suspension of TBCD minting while production was funded through the now defunct VXOR token. The second and current iteration uses the KUSD Dollar pegged synthetic asset to fund production, while implementing buyback and burn of this asset within network transactions. Here is a detailed overview of both iterations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SORA V3 tokenomics were defined over two iterations. The first called for a suspension of TBCD minting while production was funded through the now defunct VXOR token. The second and current iteration uses the KUSD Dollar-pegged synthetic asset to fund production, while implementing buyback and burn of this asset within network transactions. Below is a detailed overview of both iterations.
```
edited for easier reading

![](/.gitbook/assets/sora-v3-2.png)

Economies are like organisms; they are functioning, living entities and must constantly grow and evolve to stay alive. This means that money, the lifeblood of an economy, needs to provide sufficient nourishment to producers while also not increasing beyond the size needed to sustain health.

In SORA v2, the SORA (XOR) token (the main token on the network, used to pay gas fees) had an elastic supply managed by a token bonding curve. The theory behind this was sound — to manage the token supply to meet the economy's needs. However, without sufficient reserves, the SORA v2 economy experienced liquidity shortages.

At the same time, countries worldwide have been debasing their currencies by expanding their monetary bases for non-productive uses. While not directly related to SORA, this is an important narrative for billions of people, and (perhaps intentionally), many people became scared of any expansion in currency supplies, even for productive uses. This meta-narrative has important implications for SORA because we have to work within the confines of the grand narrative created globally, as we are, as of yet, too small to direct it ourselves.

> Because of the state of the world and the needs that people all over the world have, SORA v3 must be able to provide adequate funding for producers to target high GDP growth in the SORA economy while also limiting the increase of token supply expansion, given the meta-narrative that has caused people to be fearful of “muh inflation.”

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because of the state of the world and the needs that people all over the world have, SORA v3 must be able to provide adequate funding for producers to target high GDP growth in the SORA economy while also limiting the increase of token supply expansion, given the meta-narrative that has caused people to be fearful of inflation.
```
I think the sarcasm is misplaced here.

> Builders in the SORA ecosystem under the v3 tokenomics will still get paid for their work, but not in XOR. Instead, they will be paid in tokens (probably changing monthly or quarterly) that will be accepted as collateral to create Kensetsu XOR, a stablecoin pegged to the value of XOR. Kensetsu XOR will have the liquidity builders need because it will be usable as if it were real XOR in Chameleon pools (initially XOR-ETH only and configurable by on-chain governance). LPs of Chameleon pools will farm KARMA tokens to encourage Chameleon pool liquidity, as explained in a [recent article by Satoshi Shibarimoto](https://medium.com/@shibarimoto/earn-karma-with-a-sora-chameleon-01b25c12fd49).

Reviewer 2: I think this paragraph (50) is outdated. 
The concrete tokenomics for v3 are still under investigation as I understand.

Author: Addressed

Author: Updated

::: info

> The Chameleon Pool model is no longer active.

Reviewer: Then what is the previous paragraph talking about? This bit confuses and should ideally be rewritten for clarity along with the previous paragraph.

Author: Addressed

Author: Edited

:::

> Keep in mind that increasing the amount of goods and services in an economy is crucial, by definition, to expand the GDP. Therefore, any viable economic system needs to keep in mind ΔMV=ΔPY and understand that **you need an expansion of purchasing power for production to create more goods/services**. SORA v3 tokenomics follows the [General Quantity Theory of Money (Disaggregated Quantity Theory of Money)](https://cyberleninka.ru/article/n/banks-and-economic-growth-the-general-theory-in-a-basic-disequilibrium-model-with-five-rationing-regimes) so our economy can expand sustainably and reliably, which will enable us to accomplish our goal of creating a new economic order for the world that enables collaboration instead of exploitation and competition. _We will all own XOR, and we will be happy._

Reviewer: > ΔMV=ΔPY 

These acronyms were not defined previously, and it's not obvious what they mean.

Author: Added a link to where they are explained

Author: Added a link to their source

### Second Iteration

![](/.gitbook/assets/sora-v3-3.png)

Given the current state of the world, like it or not, even cryptoland is dollarized. That means SORA must also provide access to tokens at par with the dollar if we want to increase market share. Fortunately, _Kensetsu_ (SORA’s version of MakerDAO) is a natural way for us to provide this access to our users.

However, given the low liquidity for Kensetsu assets up until now, especially KUSD, there haven’t been any good options for SORA users to access stable USD values. So, to build the SORA economy into one that is useful in daily life, we, as an ecosystem, should work to maintain the peg of at least KUSD so that there is reliable liquidity for a token with dollar value, which is the current world standard (until XOR takes over).

> #### BUIDLing NEO

Reviewer: I'm hesitant about the use of BUIDL here. While someone well-versed in crypto will recognize the reference, someone else who isn't as well-versed may be confused, go search for the term and stumble upon the BUIDL token, which has nothing to do with Sora, and be further confused.

Author: Edited

Creating financial software demands the highest quality code and repeatable processes; otherwise, it cannot be reliably used. Teams that BUIDL in the SORA ecosystem are expected to deliver the best results and have consistently proven themselves. However, professional teams cannot be expected to work for free, nor should they. Because we are still in the BUIDL phase of creating the SORA economic system, we should pay teams that work in the SORA ecosystem in a unit of account that is readily understandable, namely w.r.t. dollars (USD, also known as _cuck bucks_).

> So, as part of the improvements to SORA on our journey to v3, KUSD is now proposed to be used to pay builders. To create the necessary KUSD and have it maintain its peg, it is important to use only hard collateral (not soft cats😿). For now, this means using TBCD as collateral. Even though we will need to mint **a lot of TBCD (one hundred billion to be exact)** to lock in Kensetsu vaults to mint KUSD, these TBCD won’t actually be converted to XOR, so it won’t affect the XOR token supply. It is just important to have secure collateral in Kensetsu vaults to build up confidence in the system.

Reviewer 2: _"For now, this means using TBCD as collateral. Even though we will need to mint **a lot of TBCD (one hundred billion to be exact)** to lock in Kensetsu vaults [...]"_

It is mentioned in the SORA V3 Tokenomics section that TBCD minting has been stopped. Those sentences sound in contradiction with what is exposed in the aforementioned section.

Author: Edited

> To maintain the peg of KUSD to cuck bucks, it is proposed that the SORA ecosystem use a TBCD treasury to buy back and burn KUSD whenever it goes below the peg. The can increase the XOR supply in the short term, but in the future, when there is more demand for KUSD, and the ecosystem has been built up (which can only be done by maintaining the peg), this TBCD will all be burned through a buy-back-and-burn mechanism (a portion of transaction fees), which will also burn the XOR created (XOR is backed by TBCD, so burning TBCD will also burn XOR—it’s a 2-for-1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To maintain the peg of KUSD to cuck bucks, it is proposed that the SORA ecosystem use a TBCD treasury to buy back and burn KUSD whenever it goes below the peg. This can increase the XOR supply in the short term, but in the future, when there is more demand for KUSD, and the ecosystem has been built up (which can only be done by maintaining the peg), this TBCD will all be burned through a buy-back-and-burn mechanism (a portion of transaction fees), which will also burn the XOR created (XOR is backed by TBCD, so burning TBCD will also burn XOR—it’s a 2-for-1).
```
typo, I think

> To maintain the peg of KUSD to cuck bucks, it is proposed that the SORA ecosystem use a TBCD treasury to buy back and burn KUSD whenever it goes below the peg. The can increase the XOR supply in the short term, but in the future, when there is more demand for KUSD, and the ecosystem has been built up (which can only be done by maintaining the peg), this TBCD will all be burned through a buy-back-and-burn mechanism (a portion of transaction fees), which will also burn the XOR created (XOR is backed by TBCD, so burning TBCD will also burn XOR—it’s a 2-for-1).

Reviewer 2: _"The can increase the XOR supply in the short term, but in the future"_ - there seems to be a word missing: "The [treasury?] can increase [...]".

Author: Addressed in a comment by @a-zorina

However, this can be a costly way to obtain funds if a very large bonus has to be paid to convince people to give up their XOR. So another option is to inject more XOR into the economy to build the bridge but then charge some fees to use the bridge to withdraw and burn that XOR later in the future. In addition to lowering the cost of infrastructure development, this simple example also highlights the principle of how the elasticity of purchasing power can be used to provide for production without crowding out other uses of money in an economy, as the original three people in the example can use their funds for different uses, like investing in opportunities that will generate even more wealth in the economy.

#### The Vision for SORA V3

> We can build a sustainable and self-reinforcing economy by using buy-back-and-burn mechanisms (a portion of the VAL and PSWAP re-mint to go to burning KUSD, while still keeping VAL and PSWAP strictly deflationary, as well as a portion of the XOR network fees paid with each transaction) to help KUSD maintain its peg, with a large TBCD treasury to cover any gaps, with an additional mechanism to buy-back-and-burn TBCD (10% of the remint of VAL and PSWAP—which captures both the use and volume of activity on the network). Through this process, we can create a powerful vortex that will eventually lead to the burning of a large amount of the XOR supply while still creating conditions for financing new output in the SORA economy. Yes, it’s a long-term play, but creating a new world economy that isn’t based on debt and enslavement will take time and have a never-ending share of sceptics and critics.

Reviewer: This is a very long and very hard to parse sentence. It would benefit from being turned into some bullet points, but I am not sure I understood it well enough to suggest specific changes.

Author: Edited and added a diagram in the section

> We can build a sustainable and self-reinforcing economy by using buy-back-and-burn mechanisms (a portion of the VAL and PSWAP re-mint to go to burning KUSD, while still keeping VAL and PSWAP strictly deflationary, as well as a portion of the XOR network fees paid with each transaction) to help KUSD maintain its peg, with a large TBCD treasury to cover any gaps, with an additional mechanism to buy-back-and-burn TBCD (10% of the remint of VAL and PSWAP—which captures both the use and volume of activity on the network). Through this process, we can create a powerful vortex that will eventually lead to the burning of a large amount of the XOR supply while still creating conditions for financing new output in the SORA economy. Yes, it’s a long-term play, but creating a new world economy that isn’t based on debt and enslavement will take time and have a never-ending share of sceptics and critics.

Reviewer 2: We should add a visual here to illustrate the scheme. Similar to the one in https://wiki.sora.org/kusd.html#support-kusd

Author: Done

- **Enhances resilience**: De-correlates CBDCs and other Government-issued digital assets from political and economic instability, providing a stable, supranational platform for global transactions.
- **Supports economic sovereignty**: Balances the role of nation states in managing their domains with the freedom of borderless financial activities.

The SORA v3 Hub Chain will enable anyone, including central banks, to be able to create their own assets on the global SORA v3 platform. For those wanting greater privacy, they can process transactions in a private subnet they control, without sacrificing the security or interoperability of a supranational, decentralized blockchain.

![](/.gitbook/assets/sora-v3-hub-chain-cbdc.png)

Built on [Hyperledger Iroha 2](https://www.lfdecentralizedtrust.org/blog/announcing-hyperledger-iroha-2), the SORA v3 Hub Chain empowers nations, institutions, and individuals by providing a solid infrastructure base to create a robust and inclusive financial system, bringing the best of blockchain technology under one network.

## SORA V3 Tokenomics

> The SORA V3 tokenomics were defined over two iterations. The first called for a suspension of TBCD minting while production was funded through the now defunct VXOR token. The second and current iteration uses the KUSD Dollar-pegged synthetic asset to fund production, while implementing buyback and burn of this asset within network transactions. Below is a detailed overview of both iterations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The SORA V3 tokenomics were defined over two iterations. The first called for a suspension of [TBCD](./tbcd.md) minting while production was funded through the now defunct VXOR token. The second and current iteration uses the [KUSD](./kusd.md) Dollar-pegged synthetic asset to fund production, while implementing buyback and burn of this asset within network transactions. Below is a detailed overview of both iterations.
```
Links to relevant resources added for clarity.

![](/.gitbook/assets/sora-v3-2.png)

Economies are like organisms; they are functioning, living entities and must constantly grow and evolve to stay alive. This means that money, the lifeblood of an economy, needs to provide sufficient nourishment to producers while also not increasing beyond the size needed to sustain health.

In SORA v2, the SORA (XOR) token (the main token on the network, used to pay gas fees) had an elastic supply managed by a token bonding curve. The theory behind this was sound — to manage the token supply to meet the economy's needs. However, without sufficient reserves, the SORA v2 economy experienced liquidity shortages.

At the same time, countries worldwide have been debasing their currencies by expanding their monetary bases for non-productive uses. While not directly related to SORA, this is an important narrative for billions of people, and (perhaps intentionally), many people became scared of any expansion in currency supplies, even for productive uses. This meta-narrative has important implications for SORA because we have to work within the confines of the grand narrative created globally, as we are, as of yet, too small to direct it ourselves.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

### Second Iteration

```
I'd suggest to start the section here.

> Because of the state of the world and the needs that people all over the world have, SORA v3 must be able to provide adequate funding for producers to target high GDP growth in the SORA economy while also limiting the increase of token supply expansion, given the meta-narrative that has caused people to be fearful of inflation.

Reviewer: This looks like the beginning of the Second iteration section already. I suggest to move the heading here.

Author: Hi, could you please suggest on the doc?

Reviewer: added suggestions to add and delete

Builders in the SORA ecosystem under the v3 tokenomics will still get paid for their work, but not in XOR. Instead, they will be paid in stable tokens such as [KUSD](./kusd.md), although the final tokenomics are still under research.

> Keep in mind that increasing the amount of goods and services in an economy is crucial, by definition, to expand the GDP. Therefore, any viable economic system needs to keep in mind ΔMV=ΔPY (_take a look at the [SORAnomics](./sora-economy.md#soranomics) if this is unclear_) and understand that **you need an expansion of purchasing power for production to create more goods/services**. SORA v3 tokenomics follows the [General Quantity Theory of Money (Disaggregated Quantity Theory of Money)](https://cyberleninka.ru/article/n/banks-and-economic-growth-the-general-theory-in-a-basic-disequilibrium-model-with-five-rationing-regimes) so our economy can expand sustainably and reliably, which will enable us to accomplish our goal of creating a new economic order for the world that enables collaboration instead of exploitation and competition. _We will all own XOR, and we will be happy._

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keep in mind that increasing the amount of goods and services in an economy is crucial, by definition, to expand the GDP. Therefore, any viable economic system needs to keep in mind ΔMV=ΔPY (_take a look at the [SORAnomics](./sora-economy.md#soranomics) for more information_) and understand that **you need an expansion of purchasing power for production to create more goods/services**. SORA v3 tokenomics follows the [General Quantity Theory of Money (Disaggregated Quantity Theory of Money)](https://cyberleninka.ru/article/n/banks-and-economic-growth-the-general-theory-in-a-basic-disequilibrium-model-with-five-rationing-regimes) so our economy can expand sustainably and reliably, which will enable us to accomplish our goal of creating a new economic order for the world that enables collaboration instead of exploitation and competition. _We will all own XOR, and we will be happy._
```
Small fix for tone

> ### Second Iteration

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```
remove from here and move above

#### The Vision for SORA V3

We can build a sustainable and self-reinforcing economy by using buy-back-and-burn mechanisms. Through this process, we can create a powerful vortex that will eventually lead to the burning of a large amount of the XOR supply while still creating conditions for financing new output in the SORA economy, as documented below in the transaction fee breakdown.

Yes, it’s a long-term play, but creating a new world economy that isn’t based on debt and enslavement will take time and have a never-ending share of sceptics and critics.

![](/.gitbook/assets/sora-v3-5.png)

> In the SORA economy, XOR is the predictable monetary base. VAL and PSWAP are on top of the XOR monetary base, incentivizing validators and liquidity providers. 

Reviewer 2: PSWAP is specific to Polkaswap (SORA v2) (DEX token). On SORA v3, the branding will be different, so PSWAP will have an equivalent but under another name. If we want to stick to v3 information here, I suggest we remove the reference to PSWAP.

Author: Edited
